Hello everyone in this lesson we will learn how to create a photo gallery without further ado.
Let's jump right into the action.
All right.
So here is the home page of my public facing WordPress site.
And if I use my navigation menu to navigate to my photo gallery page we can see that.
Currently this page only consists of a bit of dummy or filler content.
So our goal for this lesson is to replace this with real photo gallery content.
So if I want to make changes to this page I can just look up here and the top bar and use this edit
page button all right and then down within this main content field.
Let me get rid of this text and instead I will say below is a collection of some of my favorite photographs.
Then I will drop down to a new line.
So here's my cursor.
And now I want to create a photo gallery.
So a grid of images.
So maybe I want there to be four images per row.
So one image here one image here one image here and one image here and then if the user clicks on any
one of those four images they can view the larger full resolution copy of the photograph.
So if I want to create a photo gallery my first step is to use this button right here that reads add
media and let's pay attention to this left hand side of this pop up screen.
Currently we are viewing the insert media screen.
And our goal is to create a photo gallery.
So we actually want to switch to this create gallery screen so go ahead and click that.
OK.
And now we just build up a collection of images that will make up our photo gallery.
Currently this media library link is selected and this is basically WordPress asking me if I want to
use any of my previously uploaded images in my photo gallery.
In my case these are the only two images that I've uploaded in the past.
And I don't want to use those in my photo gallery so I'm going to need to upload new photographs from
my hard drive to fill up this gallery.
So to do that I'm going to click on this upload files button.
Then I will click on select files and from here it's up to you to find the photographs on your computer's
hard drive that you want to use in your photo gallery.
So in my case I have a folder on my desktop named assets and I'm going to use these 8 images.
You can click and drag to select multiple images to upload at once or if you're using Windows you should
be able to hold down either the control or shift key and then individually click on the different images
you want.
Or if you're using a Mac you can use the command key or the Apple key and hold that down.
And then you can click on the individual images that you were interested in.
OK.
Now depending on the speed of your internet connection and how many photos you uploaded and how large
each file was the uploading process might take a minute or two or maybe even five or ten minutes but
once it's complete you will see thumbnails for all of your images here and basically any image that
has a checkmark next to it will be added to this new photo gallery that we are trying to create.
So for example all of the images we see right now except for these two are the images that I just right
now uploaded and they all have check marks.
But if for some reason I did want to use one of these two images that I uploaded on a previous day I
could just click on them.
So now they have the checkmarks but obviously I don't actually want to use them.
So then I can just click on them again to remove the check marks.
All right.
So once you've selected all of the images that you want to use in your gallery and they have check marks
on them go ahead and click this blue.
Create a new gallery button from this screen you are free to drag and drop to reorder your gallery.
So maybe I want this elephant photographed come first and then I want the cat wearing glasses to come
second.
You get the idea.
Also you are free to add captions for each photo here so I could click here and say elephant with baby
elephant.
Maybe I don't need a caption for this cat photograph but maybe for this cupcake photo I want to say
cupcakes.
You get the idea.
Now I do want to bring your attention to this right hand column.
So the first option we see here is linked to and this is what controls what will happen when a visitor
of our Web site clicks on one of these thumbnail images.
So if I click this I'm going to select media file so that way when a visitor clicks on one of the thumbnails
it will take them directly to the full large resolution.
Original copy of the photograph.
The next option is columns.
You are free to choose however many photos you want to be per row.
I think it would look good if there were four photographs per row so I choose four.
I'm not sure why you would want to randomize the order but you're free to check that if you want to.
I will leave it unchecked so that the order that I created will stay intact and then the last option
size controls the size of the image before the user clicks on one of the images.
You're free to change this and experiment with it.
But I would say that nine times out of 10 thumbnail is probably the best bet.
OK I'm happy with those options so I will click this bottom right.
Insert gallery button here we can see our new photo gallery.
And why don't we go ahead and update this page using this blue update button and then see what it looks
like on the public front end of our website.
So up here we see page successfully created and I can use this link to jump to my public Web site.
Let me scroll down a bit.
Looks good.
And if I click on the elephant thumbnail
it takes me to the original large resolution.
Very high quality copy of the photograph and then I can just use my web browsers back arrow button to
go back a page.
OK and practice makes perfect.
So why don't we try to create another photo gallery.
I want to point out that we can include multiple galleries on the same page.
So I want to edit this photo gallery page again so up in my top bar I will use this edit page link so
down here within our main content field I will click to the right of the gallery to place my cursor
there and then I will use my enter or return key to drop down to a new line.
And why don't we create a bit of text that reads seen in photos and maybe instead of standard paragraph
text I want this to look like a headline so I just select this text and then up here from this menu
I will choose heading level 2 and then right below that headline I will just push enter to drop down
to a new line.
And now why don't I add another photo gallery so my cursor is where I want it.
We can see it blinking and now I'm just going to use this add media button.
I will click Create gallery over here in the left hand column and I could create a new gallery by reusing
some of these images that I've already uploaded but I want to upload a few new images so click upload
files here.
It then select files I have a folder on my computer named scenic and it contains these four photographs
that I want to use.
OK looks good.
We can see that the four new images I just uploaded are the only four with the checkmark on them.
Perfect.
Those are the only four that I want in my new image gallery.
So I will just click Create new gallery down here.
Maybe I want this mountain to be the first photo so I can just drag and drop over on this right hand
column.
I'll change this to media file and I want per row.
So I will change columns to 4 for column grid.
And now I can just click insert gallery and there we have it.
Now before I save this page I do want to point out that it's not like you can only add photo galleries
to a page that has a title of photo gallery you can add a photo gallery to any page in any post.
Ok so feel free to use this technique wherever you see fit on your Web site.
Having said that I will click the blue update button.
OK here we see page successfully updated.
I will use this link to preview things.
Let me scroll down a bit perfect so here's our first photo gallery.
Here's our new headline.
And here's the second photo gallery.
And if I click on one of these thumbnails so let me click on this one.
It takes me to the original full resolution copy of the photograph.
Now you'll notice that I need to use my web browser back button to navigate back to the Web site.
If I want to click on a different photograph so again I would have to click the back button.
And maybe I want to view this fourth photograph.
Cool.
And then I would have to click the back button again so we can see that that is not ideal.
In a perfect world our visitors would not have to keep clicking the back button on their browser.
In a perfect world maybe when a visitor clicks one of these thumbnails it would open a larger copy of
the image that maybe takes up this portion of the screen and then the outer edges of the screen would
maybe be a slightly transparent black background and maybe there would be a small x button right about
here.
You get the idea and the user can maybe click forward and back arrows to switch between different photographs.
That kind of a layout and behavior is often referred to as a light box or a modal or sometimes it's
even referred to as a pop up photo gallery or a pop up slide show or pop up carousel.
But most of the time we will hear that referred to as either a light box or modal.
Anyways long story short the point that I'm trying to make is that that behavior would be much better
than what we currently have because visitors of our website should not have to use the back button in
their browser to switch between the different full resolution copies of the photos.
It's just not a user friendly experience.
So in our next lesson we will learn how to customize WordPress to use a lightbox or modal or a pop up
type of behavior when visitors click on one of our thumbnails to pique your interest.
Maybe a little bit more.
In other words our next lesson will be our first exposure to something called a plugin.
So in our next lesson we will answer the question what in the world is a plug in.
And we will leverage the power of plug ins to create the exact photo gallery experience that we want.
It should be a lot of fun.
Let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.